Combine skeleton tutorials into materials science topic (#4)
muon-spectroscopy-computational-project/training-material: topics/materials-science/tutorials/muon-stopping-sites-muairss-uep/tutorial.md

---
layout: tutorial_hands_on
title: Finding muon stopping sites using the AIRSS and UEP methods
level: Introductory

> zenodo_link: https://sandbox.zenodo.org/record/1031546

Reviewer: Another place to update Zenodo

questions:
- "What are stopping sites and why is finding them important?"
- "What computational techniques can be used to find stopping sites?"
- "What materials can I apply these techniques to?"
- "How can Galaxy help me with my analysis?"
objectives:
- "Understand why finding stopping sites is useful"
- "Apply the AIRSS and UEP methods together to find stopping sites"
- "Understand the limitations of these tools and techniques"
time_estimation: 1H
key_points:
- Galaxy supports multiple PyMuonSuite tools which can be used together to find muon stopping sites
- The simulations require the results of DFT calculations using CASTEP as a starting point

> - The UEP approach can be performed entirely via Galaxy, or CASTEP can be used externally

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The AIRSS method involves three stages: site generation, optimisation, and clustering
- There are multiple approaches for the optimisation stage. The UEP method can be performed via Galaxy, or CASTEP can be used externally
- The UEP approach requires a CASTEP DFT calculation to be completed as a starting point
```

contributors:
- elichad
- leandro-liborio
- patrick-austin
subtopic: muon-spectroscopy
priority: 2
abbreviations:
  AIRSS: Ab Initio Random Structure Search
  DFT: Density Functional Theory
  UEP: Unperturbed Electrostatic Potential
---

# Introduction

The problem of identifying the stopping site of a muon is often key in the
interpretation of experimental results, and also one of those that computational
tools are most commonly used to solve. Roughly, one can imagine that at the
atomic level, muon spectroscopy experiments go something like this:

- the polarized muon beam is fired at the sample, and the muons travel a certain
  depth inside the target;
- through inelastic collisions with the atoms of the lattice, muons shed their
  kinetic energy, which turns into heat or causes small amounts of damage to the

>   crystal, until it becomes low enough that it is comparable to their potential

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  crystal. This continues until the muons' kinetic energy becomes low enough that it is comparable to their potential
```

  energy in the electrostatic fields generated by electrons and nuclei alike;
- at that point, Coulomb forces start driving the muon, and eventually, it loses
  as much energy as possible and comes to a stop in a position that represents a

>   global, or at least local, minimum for its electrostatic potential energy,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  local, and possibly global, minimum for its electrostatic potential energy,
```

  where it spends the rest of its time until it decays.

![Graphical illustration of muons being implanted in a sample, then decaying to a positron and being detected](../../images/muon_spectroscopy_diagram.png)

Where these minima of the potential actually are isn't always obvious. In some
cases, it's trivial - for example in organic molecules the mechanism is often
the same as for regular hydrogenation, and so the muon, having captured an
electron and formed a muonium pseudo-atom, ends up breaking a double or triple
bond and attaching itself to the molecule by using one of the unpaired
electrons. However in other crystalline structures it can be a lot harder. A

> reliable atomistic simulation that accurately predicted the potential through
> which the atoms interact, though, can identify these possible sites. In order to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
reliable atomistic simulation that accurately predicts the potential through
which the atoms interact, can identify these possible sites. In order to
```
```suggestion
reliable atomistic simulation that accurately predicts the potential through
which the atoms interact can identify these possible sites. In order to
```

> find them, however, one generally needs to use a brute force approach to explore

Reviewer: This doesn't quite make sense - if the atomistic simulation finds the sites, why do we need to find them with brute force?

I _think_ this means that only some of the possible sites will actually be occupied by muons, hence this suggestion

```suggestion
find which possible sites are actual muon stopping sites, however, one generally needs to use a brute force approach to explore
```

Author: Yeah I copied this bit from the [PyMuonSuite GH wiki](https://github.com/muon-spectroscopy-computational-project/pymuon-suite/wiki/MuAIRSS) so am also unclear what exactly it means.

Having read the intro to [Computational prediction of muon stopping sites using ab initio random structure searching (AIRSS)](https://aip.scitation.org/doi/pdf/10.1063/1.5024450) that seems to imply that just using UEP analysis "is not fully reliable" as:
>In the case of muonium, it has been suggested that the screening
provided by the electron makes the muon less sensitive to the
electrostatic potential of the host.6,8,9 With regards to charged
muons, it has been proposed that the inability to account for
the muon-host interactions is what decreases the efficiency
of the UEP method in predicting the muon stopping sites.

So my reading would be:
 - We can identify locations that are likely in some organic molecules  because we can assume (similar to hydrogen) we'll latch onto (e.g.) double bonds.
 - But that in general (e.g. in "other crystalline structures") you could use UEP ("reliable atomistic simulation"?) alone to find potential sites.
 - **But** since that doesn't **always** work, you might want to brute force it using (for example) AIRSS.

I'm considering rewritting this whole paragraph to resemble the points in the paper slightly more:
```
Where these minima of the potential actually are isn't always obvious. In some
cases it's trivial, for example in organic molecules the mechanism is often the
same as for regular hydrogenation. The muon, having captured an electron and
formed a muonium pseudo-atom, ends up breaking a double or triple bond and
attaching itself to the molecule by using one of the unpaired electrons. However
in other, crystalline structures it can be a lot harder. While an atomistic
simulation that accurately predicts the potential through which the atoms
interact can be used identify possible sites, this approach is not fully
reliable (for example when applied to fluorides) {% cite Liborio2018 %}. In
order to avoid such limitations, one can use a brute force approach to explore
all the possible positions in which the muon may end up. {AIRSS} is one such
method {% cite Liborio2018 %}.
```

Whatever we decide on here, and wherever other changes are made to content which I've just copied wholesale from an existing source, we should probably make an effort to update the source? Joel's already been doing this for some changes for the MSS tutorial.

Reviewer: That new paragraph is good, and yes I'd say update the wiki with that too

all the possible positions in which the muon may end up. {AIRSS} is one such
method {% cite Liborio2018 %}.

> In this workflow, we use the {UEP} Method: a method that requires only {DFT}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this workflow, we use the {UEP} Method: a method that requires only a single {DFT}
```

stopping site of the diamagnetic muon, relying on the approximation that the
muon’s presence does not significantly affect its surroundings.

> ### Agenda
>
> In this tutorial, we will cover:
>
> 1. TOC
> {:toc}
>
{: .agenda}

# Preparation steps
First, we need to download some simple example data and a workflow for finding
possible stopping sites. For this, we use a CASTEP `.cell` file containing two
Silicon atoms. In order to run this workflow, we also need the output files from
calculating the electronic density with CASTEP and a parameter file for our tools.
These have all been pre-generated for this tutorial, but in general you would
need to create these yourself outside of Galaxy.

## Get data

> <hands-on-title>Data upload</hands-on-title>
>
> 1. Create a new history for this tutorial
> 2. Import the files from [Zenodo]({{ page.zenodo_link }}) or from
>    the shared data library (`GTN - Material` -> `{{ page.topic_name }}`
>     -> `{{ page.title }}`):
>
>    ```
>    https://sandbox.zenodo.org/record/1031546/files/Si-muairss-uep.yaml
>    https://sandbox.zenodo.org/record/1031546/files/Si-out.cell
>    https://sandbox.zenodo.org/record/1031546/files/Si.castep

> >    https://sandbox.zenodo.org/record/1031546/files/Si.den_fmt

Reviewer: More Zenodo links to update

>    ```
>
>    {% snippet faqs/galaxy/datasets_import_via_link.md %}
>
>    {% snippet faqs/galaxy/datasets_import_from_data_library.md %}
>
> 3. Rename the datasets to match their file names, if needed.
> 4. Check that the datatype is correct for each dataset.
>
>    {% snippet faqs/galaxy/datasets_change_datatype.md datatype="datatypes" %}
>
{: .hands_on}

## Import workflow

> <hands-on-title>Import workflow</hands-on-title>
>
> 1. Import the workflow for this tutorial using [these instructions](workflows/).
> 2. Open the editor for the workflow, and verify that all the required tools
>    are installed on your Galaxy instance, and have the same version(s) as the
>    tools in workflow. If this is not the case a dialogue box will warn you.
>
{: .hands_on}
# Finding stopping sites

We can execute the entire workflow in one go, which will generate stopping sites
based on our four input files. Alternatively, we can run the three tools that
comprise the workflow one by one. The steps below describe each one in detail:

> what parameters they take and what exactly they do.

Reviewer: A quick explanation of the options that are set in the YAML file would be beneficial here, so it doesn't seem like a total black box (maybe inside an optional block).

e.g.
```
poisson_r: 0.8          # sets the minimum spacing between generated muons
vdw_scale: 0.25         # sets the minimum spacing between generated muons and existing atoms
name: si                # a name for this simulation
charged: true           # treat the muon as a positive charge
calculator: uep         # method to use for optimisation
uep_chden: si.den_fmt   # CASTEP electron density file
uep_gw_factor: 4.0      # adjusts how atom potentials are modelled
geom_steps: 300         # maximum number of geometry optimisation steps
geom_force_tol: 0.05    # tolerance on geometry optimisation in eV/AA
clustering_method: hier # hierarchical clustering
clustering_hier_t: 0.2  # threshold value for clusters
```

Actually, maybe it's worth making the dataset itself look like this as well...

Author: Will cover these points with the inclusion of the config tool, thanks for the explanations

Reviewer: I've added these comments to the version that will go on Zenodo

> ## Generate muonated structures (pm-muairss)

Reviewer: These titles are the old names of the tools. I think we can drop the `(pm-muairss)`
```suggestion
## AIRSS Stage 1: Generate muonated structures
```

>    - {% icon param-file %} *"Structure file"*: `Si-out.cell` (Input dataset)
>    - {% icon param-file %} *"YAML parameter file"*: `Si-muairss-uep.yaml` (Input dataset)
>    - *"Does your configuration use the CASTEP calculator?"*: `No`
> 2. Should generate the following output(s):
>    - {% icon param-file %} `Muonated Si-out.cell using Si-muairss-uep.yaml` (Output dataset)
>
>    > <comment-title>CASTEP calculator</comment-title>
>    >
>    > In our example we have not used the CASTEP calculator. If we had, we
>    > would have the option of providing a CASTEP parameter file as well.
>    > However, we would not be able to use the `pm-uep-opt` tool for the next
>    > step in the workflow, and would have to manually run CASTEP on these
>    > structures outside of Galaxy, then zip and upload the results to use as
>    > the input to step 3.
>    {: .comment}
>
{: .hands_on}

The output of this tool is a zipped folder containing muon positions. We can
then use this with the next tool in our workflow.

> ## Run UEP optimisation (pm-uep-opt)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## AIRSS Stage 2: Optimisation using UEP
```

Now we have some muonated structures, we have to optimise the position of the
muon in each. This tool minimises the classical electrostatic forces with
respect to the muon position, using the {UEP} generated for the original
structure.

> <hands-on-title>Task description</hands-on-title>
>
> 1. {% tool [PyMuonSuite AIRSS UEP Optimise](toolshed.g2.bx.psu.edu/repos/muon-spectroscopy-computational-project/pm_uep_opt/pm_uep_opt/0.2.1+galaxy1) %} with the following parameters:

> >    - {% icon param-file %} *"Muonated structures (.zip)"*: `Muonated Si-out.cell using Si-muairss-uep.yaml` (output of **Generate muonated structures (pm-muairss)** {% icon tool %})

Reviewer: ```suggestion
>    - {% icon param-file %} *"Muonated structures (.zip)"*: `Muonated Si-out.cell using Si-muairss-uep.yaml` (output of **PyMuonSuite AIRSS Generate** {% icon tool %})
```

>    - {% icon param-file %} *"Charge density file (.den_fmt)"*: `Si.den_fmt` (Input dataset)
>    - {% icon param-file %} *"CASTEP log (.castep)"*: `Si.castep` (Input dataset)
> 2. Should generate the following output(s):
>    - {% icon param-file %} `UEP results for Muonated Si-out.cell using Si-muairss-uep.yaml` (Output dataset)
>
{: .hands_on}

The output of this tool is a zipped folder containing the optimised structures.
We can then use this with the next tool in our workflow.

> ## Run clustering for optimised structures (pm-muairss read)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## AIRSS Stage 3: Clustering
```

Finally, we can cluster the optimised positions in order to generate a short
list of potential stopping sites.

> <hands-on-title>Task description</hands-on-title>
>
> 1. {% tool [PyMuonSuite AIRSS Cluster](toolshed.g2.bx.psu.edu/repos/muon-spectroscopy-computational-project/pm_muairss_read/pm_muairss_read/0.2.1+galaxy1) %} with the following parameters:

> >    - {% icon param-file %} *"optimised muonated structures (.zip)"*: `UEP results for Muonated Si-out.cell using Si-muairss-uep.yaml` (output of **Run UEP optimisation (pm-uep-opt)** {% icon tool %})

Reviewer: ```suggestion
>    - {% icon param-file %} *"optimised muonated structures (.zip)"*: `UEP results for Muonated Si-out.cell using Si-muairss-uep.yaml` (output of **PyMuonSuite AIRSS UEP Optimise** {% icon tool %})
```

> 2. Should generate the following output(s):
>    - {% icon param-file %} `Cluster Report` (Output dataset)
>    - {% icon param-file %} `Cluster Data` (Output dataset)

> >

Reviewer: Could add a comment here explaining the different clustering methods, and that we've pre-selected one in the YAML

Author: I'll do something for this, but detail will probably depend on how the inclusion of the config tool is handled.

{: .hands_on}

> The report will contain a human readable summary of the clustering, with the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The 'Cluster report' will contain a human readable summary of the clustering, with the
```

> The report will contain a human readable summary of the clustering, with the

Reviewer: Is it worth including an example report in the tutorial and explaining what each part of it means?

Author: Yeah, not sure how deterministic the process is but regardless of what results someone generates by following the tutorial can at least explain the format.

Reviewer: I think you'll _normally_ get 2 clusters with this input, but sometimes you may get more (e.g. I just did a run this morning that gave me 6 clusters with high similarity)

> underlying raw data also provided. While we may have generated 10s of random

Reviewer: ```suggestion
underlying raw data also provided. While we may have generated tens of random
```

positions, we should now see only a few potential stopping sites as during the
optimisation stage the muons migrate to minimise the forces acting on them.
These new positions are likely to overlap, corresponding to local energy minima.
In addition to listing the number of muons that arrived at each stopping site,
we also report the energy corresponding to that site. This can help inform which
site(s) are most favourable for the muon.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

The 'Cluster data' output contains a machine-readable summary of the stopping sites, including their location and energy.

```

# Conclusion

![Graphical illustration of the generation, optimisation and clustering of potential stopping sites](../../images/muon_stopping_sites_diagram.png)

We have used tools from PyMuonSuite to determine possible locations of implanted
muons in a simple structure. In reality, the structure of interest will likely
be more complex, but the workflow will remain the same. It is also possible to
modify the settings used by PyMuonSuite with
{% tool [PyMuonSuite AIRSS Configure](toolshed.g2.bx.psu.edu/repos/muon-spectroscopy-computational-project/pm_yaml_config/pm_yaml_config/0.2.1+galaxy0) %}
and then use that file in our input, or alternatively modify the workflow to

> include this tool directly. The Galaxy implementation has explanations of the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
include this tool directly. The tool has explanations of the
```

> various settings, and sensible values set by default.

Reviewer: I think it's probably worth including configuration in the tutorial, but maybe that's a big enough task that it should be done separately.

Author: The impression I have (maybe falsely, and you might have a better sense of this) is that each tutorial **should** follow a single workflow. I don't have a problem deviating from this (the MSS tutorial already had like 7 workflows attached to it when I picked it up), but the "right" way to do it would probably to modify the underlying workflow (which doesn't include config) and do it all in one? It would also cover things like including the details about possible clustering methods naturally, since we'd have a section on the config tool.

Probably worth noting there is that issue considering whether we should just remove the config tool entirely muon-spectroscopy-computational-project/muon-galaxy-tools/issues/99

Reviewer: > the "right" way to do it would probably to modify the underlying workflow (which doesn't include config) and do it all in one?

Yes.

> Probably worth noting there is that issue considering whether we should just remove the config tool entirely https://github.com/muon-spectroscopy-computational-project/muon-galaxy-tools/issues/99

And this is the reason we should not do it now :) I just think it should get into the tutorial somehow - if that ends up being because we move the config options into pm-muairss-write, that's fine

Author: @joelvdavies This is the discussion that lead to replacing the config file input with one generated by the tool (essentially that it's part of the overall workflow, and allows a natural introduction of the meanings of the various parameters).

  crystal. This continues until the muons' kinetic energy becomes low enough
  that it is comparable to their potential energy in the electrostatic fields
  generated by electrons and nuclei alike.
- At that point, Coulomb forces start driving the muon, and eventually, it loses
  as much energy as possible and comes to a stop in a position that represents a
  local (and possibly global) minimum for its electrostatic potential energy,
  where it spends the rest of its time until it decays.

![Graphical illustration of muons being implanted in a sample, then decaying to a positron and being detected](../../images/muon_spectroscopy_diagram.png)

Where these minima of the potential actually are isn't always obvious. In some
cases it's trivial, for example in organic molecules the mechanism is often the
same as for regular hydrogenation. The muon, having captured an electron and
formed a muonium pseudo-atom, ends up breaking a double or triple bond and
attaching itself to the molecule by using one of the unpaired electrons. However
in other, crystalline structures it can be a lot harder. While an atomistic
simulation that accurately predicts the potential through which the atoms

> interact can be used identify possible sites, this approach is not fully

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
interact can be used to identify possible sites, this approach is not fully
```

material {% cite Sturniolo2020 %}. This, in turn, is used to calculate the
minima of the host material’s electrostatic potential and to estimate the
stopping site of the diamagnetic muon, relying on the approximation that the
muon’s presence does not significantly affect its surroundings.

> ### Agenda
>
> In this tutorial, we will cover:
>
> 1. TOC
> {:toc}
>
{: .agenda}

# Preparation steps
First, we need to download some simple example data and a workflow for finding
possible stopping sites. For this, we use a CASTEP `.cell` file containing two
Silicon atoms. In order to run this workflow, we also need the output files from
calculating the electronic density with CASTEP and a parameter file for our tools.
These have all been pre-generated for this tutorial, but in general you would
need to create these yourself outside of Galaxy.

## Get data

> <hands-on-title>Data upload</hands-on-title>
>
> 1. Create a new history for this tutorial
> 2. Import the files from [Zenodo]({{ page.zenodo_link }}) or from
>    the shared data library (`GTN - Material` -> `{{ page.topic_name }}`
>     -> `{{ page.title }}`):
>
>    ```

> >    https://zenodo.org/record/6344385/files/Si-out.cell

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
>    https://zenodo.org/record/6344385/files/Si.cell
```

Also what happened to `Si-muairss-uep.yaml` was this removed for a reason?

>    > structures outside of Galaxy, then zip and upload the results to use as
>    > the input to step 4.
>    {: .comment}
>
>    > <comment-title>Clustering method</comment-title>
>    >
>    > The choice here is between `hierarchical` and `k-means`. `hierarchical`
>    > clustering builds a tree branching progressively from a single "trunk"
>    > containing all the stopping sites to multiple "leaves" of each individual
>    > site. The number of clusters is determined by the t parameter: `0`
>    > corresponds to individual sites, with the number of clusters decreasing
>    > as t increases towards `1`. `k-means` attempts to create clusters which
>    > have equal variance within them. In this case the number of clusters to
>    > (attempt to) form is the available parameter.
>    {: .comment}
>
{: .hands_on}

The output of this tool is a simple text file containing all the parameters we
set, formatted for PyMuonSuite. As an alternative to running this step, an
existing configuration file (either from an earlier use of the tool or uploaded
directly) can be used as the input for the other PyMuonSuite tools.

> ## AIRSS Stage 2: Generate muonated structures

Reviewer 2: This title is the same as the one above, Eli's suggestion was
https://github.com/muon-spectroscopy-computational-project/training-material/pull/4#discussion_r1064570890

Reviewer 2: Although just seen the one below is labelled as Optimisation instead?

Author: Introducing the configuration file (should have) bumped all the stages up by one. This is correct but stage 1 should be renamed to something about the configuration file. Thanks for noticing this.

First, we must randomly generate a batch of possible locations for the muon
using the {AIRSS} method using the following parameters.

> <hands-on-title>Tool details</hands-on-title>
>
> 1. {% tool [PyMuonSuite AIRSS Generate](toolshed.g2.bx.psu.edu/repos/muon-spectroscopy-computational-project/pm_muairss_write/pm_muairss_write/0.2.1+galaxy1) %} with the following parameters:

> >    - {% icon param-file %} *"Structure file"*: `Si-out.cell` (Input dataset)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
>    - {% icon param-file %} *"Structure file"*: `Si.cell` (Input dataset)
```

>    - {% icon param-file %} *"YAML parameter file"*: `Configuration for si` (Input dataset)
>    - *"Does your configuration use the CASTEP calculator?"*: `No`
> 2. Should generate the following output(s):

> >    - {% icon param-file %} `Muonated Si-out.cell using Configuration for si` (Output dataset)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
>    - {% icon param-file %} `Muonated Si.cell using Configuration for si` (Output dataset)
```

>
>    > <comment-title>CASTEP calculator</comment-title>
>    >
>    > In our example we have not used the CASTEP calculator. If we had, we
>    > would have the option of providing a CASTEP parameter file as well.
>    > This file would be included in the output which, as described earlier,
>    > would need to be run outside of Galaxy instead of following step 3.
>    {: .comment}
>
{: .hands_on}

The output of this tool is a zipped folder containing muon positions. We can
then use this with the next tool in our workflow.

## AIRSS Stage 3: Optimisation using UEP

Now we have some muonated structures, we have to optimise the position of the
muon in each. This tool minimises the classical electrostatic forces with
respect to the muon position, using the {UEP} generated for the original
structure.

> <hands-on-title>Task description</hands-on-title>
>
> 1. {% tool [PyMuonSuite AIRSS UEP Optimise](toolshed.g2.bx.psu.edu/repos/muon-spectroscopy-computational-project/pm_uep_opt/pm_uep_opt/0.2.1+galaxy1) %} with the following parameters:

> >    - {% icon param-file %} *"Muonated structures (.zip)"*: `Muonated Si-out.cell using Configuration for si` (output of **PyMuonSuite AIRSS Generate** {% icon tool %})

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
>    - {% icon param-file %} *"Muonated structures (.zip)"*: `Muonated Si.cell using Configuration for si` (output of **PyMuonSuite AIRSS Generate** {% icon tool %})
```

>    - {% icon param-file %} *"Charge density file (.den_fmt)"*: `Si.den_fmt` (Input dataset)
>    - {% icon param-file %} *"CASTEP log (.castep)"*: `Si.castep` (Input dataset)
> 2. Should generate the following output(s):

> >    - {% icon param-file %} `UEP results for Muonated Si-out.cell using Configuration for si` (Output dataset)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
>    - {% icon param-file %} `UEP results for Muonated Si.cell using Configuration for si` (Output dataset)
```

>
{: .hands_on}

The output of this tool is a zipped folder containing the optimised structures.
We can then use this with the next tool in our workflow.

## AIRSS Stage 4: Clustering

Finally, we can cluster the optimised positions in order to generate a short
list of potential stopping sites.

> <hands-on-title>Task description</hands-on-title>
>
> 1. {% tool [PyMuonSuite AIRSS Cluster](toolshed.g2.bx.psu.edu/repos/muon-spectroscopy-computational-project/pm_muairss_read/pm_muairss_read/0.2.1+galaxy1) %} with the following parameters:

> >    - {% icon param-file %} *"optimised muonated structures (.zip)"*: `UEP results for Muonated Si-out.cell using Configuration for si` (output of **PyMuonSuite AIRSS UEP Optimise** {% icon tool %})

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
>    - {% icon param-file %} *"optimised muonated structures (.zip)"*: `UEP results for Muonated Si.cell using Configuration for si` (output of **PyMuonSuite AIRSS UEP Optimise** {% icon tool %})
```
